# Seth for Privacy

_**Seth for Privacy on Building Monero's Circular Economy via Privacy Tools – Monerotopia 2022**_

_Introduction - Seth for Privacy, the host of "Opt Out" Podcast on Building Monero's Circular Economy via Privacy Tools, at the Monerotopia 2022 #XMR4ALL event!_

[https://youtu.be/mvHbGTm9PrE](https://youtu.be/mvHbGTm9PrE)

---

_**Seth:**_ Awesome. Well, let’s keep on this theme of circular economies within Monero. Before we dive into building Monero’s circular economy via privacy tools, I just want to take a minute to thank Doug and Sunita, and everyone else who put this together. Just a crazy venture to put on a conference much less one that’s focused on Monero, which is obviously much smaller than Bitcoin and other projects out there. But just a huge thank you to them for planning, hosting, funding this event, all of the fun stuff that went into that. And then one more quick note before we get rolling, I’m gonna try to leave plenty of time for Q&A at the end. So hopefully there will be some good questions. But I guess that’ll depend on the quality of my talk.

So just a very, very quick intro of myself. Ultimately I’m an InfoSec engineer, information security or site reliability engineer, by day. By night I’m a privacy educator, who focuses on building out pro-privacy education, guides, basically whatever content I can build to help people understand the need for privacy, and then understand the tools that are available, and the ways that they can approach, broad personal privacy. Obviously a key part of that is Monero, and Monero has been really the key focus for me for a few years now. I try to contribute where I can. I’m not a dev, I’m no no koe or Jay Berman, or any of the people who are really doing the hard leg work, but try to find some niches where I can plug in and just help drive forward the project as a whole.

So obviously we did have the circular economy panel that just finished up right now. So there’s definitely going to be some overlap here. Hopefully this will bring in some specifics on ways that you can start building out circular economies or participating in them, as well as some of the tools that are involved in that. But definitely a huge thank you to that, I think, often we focus in Monero on the need to actually spend it and use it, but that doesn’t often equate to actually building out these circular economies and moving past just the peer-to-peer aspects, and trying to find ways that we can enable merchants to accept it etc.

What was that? Oh, yeah the bottom is covered, yeah. Let me just move these real quick. I don’t know if there will be any useful information on the bottom few inches there, but we’ll see.

So another thing that was cool to hear in that last panel, was just that there is this massively increasing need and usage of Monero. We’re seeing that really across the board even though like they said: we’re not seeing the price increases necessarily that the other projects have. So that is not only encouraging but it’s also a sign that the Monero community and people getting involved actually do value building out circular economies, do value getting into Monero and using it rather than just holding.

So moving on past that what I’ll be focusing on today is four things: basically what are circular and parallel economies, they touched on that a little bit, we’ll dive in a little bit more, how does Monero uniquely enable them, and that’s kind of going to be in contrast to Bitcoin and other transparent cryptocurrencies, why should we build circular and parallel economies, so moving past just the building adoption of Monero, but what are the other aspects that are important, and why do we need to focus on building these, and then ultimately we’ll look at a few different tools that are used today or can be used to build out these circular economies ourselves.

So a real quick walkthrough of circular and parallel economies. These terms can be used synonymously. Some people will just use one or the other, but they ultimately do have some distinction. Both really are focused on creating pure free markets, but circular economy is really a broader term that encompasses an economy, where you can earn, save and spend directly in Monero without having to move back and forth to fiat. And it’s a place where you can trade services, products, goods, whatever you want for Monero directly. And you can kind of consider this a gray market, if you think of like white, gray, black markets. Circular economies don’t really exist outside of the state, they’re normally very much above board people selling computers and other kind of normal non-illicit things for Monero. But they kind of fit into that gray market category, whereas parallel economies can really be thought of more as kind of the black market. And I know multiple people have focused on the darknet markets that are using Monero, and that is a good example of a parallel economy. Obviously they usually focus on things that are contraband or illicit. It’s not always drugs. Much of the focus today is drugs, but that can quickly change. And ultimately they rely on strong privacy guarantees in order to exist, because the state does not want black markets to exist. They go against their hegemony on how we can use our finances, they go against the things that they want to restrict or control, again not just drugs but can be a lot of other things that can be essential for communities, and we’ve seen a lot of this in like eastern Europe, where black markets are the way that people can survive, they’re not just a tool for getting recreational drugs or that kind of thing.

So how does Monero uniquely enable these things? Obviously Bitcoin brought a lot of things that enabled circular and parallel economies, that just simply weren’t possible before that. It brought that censorship resistant transaction ability to transact peer-to-peer and not rely on a third party, which are obviously absolutely vital, and it brought those things into the digital world. We obviously always had physical cash but being able to do these things digitally, do them remotely was obviously a huge step forward. Obviously there are flaws to Bitcoin, and we’ll touch on those a little bit, but the unique things that Monero brings, that enables these in a way that is not possible with Bitcoin or other transparent cryptocurrencies, ultimately is down to two things: one is the default privacy in Monero, which obviously you’re well aware of, what that is, why that approach is taken etc, and ultimately that default privacy leads to fungibility. And then the other key aspect are the low fees that we can know will stay reasonable long term. And they may not be this cheap forever, but due to dynamic block size and tail emission we can keep those fees pretty reasonable. But the first piece and ultimately the most important one that comes with Monero is this idea of default privacy and ultimately fungibility.

I’ve been diving deeply into the fungibility rabbit hole, and it’s a word that isn’t really something that we talk about outside of the cryptocurrency world, and we never had to worry about it, because ultimately fiat is fungible, because the government says it is, and physical cash is fungible, because it’s also extremely private, but in cryptocurrencies it’s a key aspect. And a real quick definition fungibility for anyone who doesn’t know, this is the Monero community so you probably all know, but for anyone who doesn’t know, fungibility is just this concept that any unit of a currency can be swapped for an equal value unit without issue. They’re interchangeable completely. But in diving into the risks that come with a lack of fungibility, like we’ve seen in Bitcoin, ultimately what that lack of fungibility does is it erodes the trust in that currency as a method of exchange, because if you as a merchant or you as someone trying to buy goods has to constantly be worried about whether or not the funds that you receive or the funds you spend will be considered good, if you’re constantly having to think: “Okay, I’m spending these funds, I need to make sure they’re not something that touched darknet market, I need to make sure they’re not something that’s attached to KYC exchanges”, etc. You constantly have that burden in your mind, and imposes a burden on you, and then for merchants if they’re accepting that Bitcoin in exchange for some kind of service or good, and then ultimately for some reason that Bitcoin is tainted, and they can’t go spend it, it destroys their trust and that method of exchange as well. And thankfully in Monero there is no risk of tainted coins and there is fungibility. So it removes that burden, it really gives a peace of mind to all the participants in the circular and parallel economies that simply cannot exist for people using Bitcoin today.

And ultimately I think that is why we have seen Monero replace Bitcoin on the darknet markets, it is because of the privacy aspects obviously, but I think ultimately the reason that it’s supplanting Bitcoin as the leader in darknet markets is because that lack of fungibility is more deeply felt in markets that are going against the state, because obviously the tank that’s applied to those coins is much stronger than things that are maybe in like a circular economy. And so obviously we’re seeing Monero take over those darknet markets, you heard the presentation earlier that walk through a lot of that and then even with the Hydra darknet market take down this week. I think we’ll see that continue that dominance in the darknet markets continue to rise. And as we’ve mentioned, no matter what your view is about what darknet markets are used for today. They’re a very important kind of canary in the coal mine to what technologies work and ultimately what money works. So they’re a good litmus test of how usable and how valuable a currency is in the real world and in a in ultimately a world that is adversarial. And then just ultimately to sum it all up, Monero is really digital cash as it should be. So it’s bringing all of those valuable aspects of physical cash which ultimately is even better than Monero for spending, privacy wise. And it’s bringing those things into the digital world.

So now why should we build circular and parallel economies. Moving past just the broad concept of we want people to use Monero and accept it for our own gain, there are kind of three major aspects that I think we need to keep in mind as to why we build these out, and ultimately why we build these out even if we don’t necessarily need them today. The first one, and before I dive into this too much more I just want to mention: I’m not an expert in circular and parallel economies, I’m not someone who’s been forced into using them through living in an authoritarian regime or something like that, so there’s definitely this is a journey that I’m taking and something that I’m learning going to pull in others in the Monero community, but specifically this idea about the reliance on ID that we’ll touch on here that’ll be really the key to the first two points, there’s a Bitcoin and Monero community member called anarchycrypto, and he’s done just incredible work on infographics and educational material, and blog posts that focus on these topics. So a lot of my learning is from him, so I just want to give him a shout out here. So the three main reasons why it’s important that we build these out. The first is really removing this reliance on the state’s control of finance, but ultimately the state’s ability to issue IDs and then gate your access to the economy based on whether or not you have one of those. Obviously for those of us in the western world, like especially in the US, everyone has an ID, it’s pretty synonymous. There aren’t many people who are excluded from that, even though there are some. But in many parts of the world it can be difficult or even impossible to get an ID depending on where you’re coming from, if you’ve immigrated, there are lots of complexities there. But if we remove that need for state issued IDs to engage in an economy through building out circular and parallel economies, we allow those people to be able to live, to get food, to get services that they need to survive, and ultimately to thrive without being able to get access to that state issued ID.

Now obviously the second piece of that is very closely tied, which is just essentially enabling a non-discriminatory access to goods and services. That discrimination can be based on many different things. It can be based on just state issued IDs, but lots of different aspects there. And building out these circular and parallel economies allow people to transact while remaining pseudonymous at least or anonymous hopefully, and essentially removes that barrier to economy, even though it may be more tricky than the regular economy itself.

And then the third piece that I think is really vital for all of us, who maybe don’t have the need for a circular and parallel economy from like the state ID perspective or any of those, is really that if we build strong circular and parallel economies, where we can again earn, save, and spend in Monero. We remove the easiest control the government has, and this is just the broad term “government” — not necessarily US government, but that’s part of it, but ultimately the state as an entity — we remove their ability to control both Monero users and Monero as a project through the fiat on and off ramps. Because ultimately they’ve realized that the easiest way they can control Monero is either to just completely restrict access, to not let anyone have it, which is delistings, that we’ve seen broadly, or to enforce KYC on every on and off ramp so that they have a neat list of who Monero users are. Obviously Monero provides you strong privacy guarantees once you withdraw, but you’re still on a list that says: you bought this Monero at this time, here’s your address, here’s your ID, your photo, all of that kind of stuff. So if we’re able to break away from that system and build these places, where we can earn, save, and spend in Monero, we remove that easy gate for control, because ultimately the state cannot stop the protocol, that is Monero. They can’t break the privacy so far of Monero. But the thing that they can do is really gate the on and off boarding into and out of Monero.

So on to really the key focus of the talk, and we’ll briefly touch on each of these tools, obviously this is not an exhaustive list, these are just some examples of tools that can be used to help build out these parallel and circular economies, and ultimately what you need from these tools is something that preserves user privacy and gives you control over who can or cannot surveil or interact in these platforms.

So the first one, and I know this is a weird one to tie into a talk about privacy tools, because I think if you’re in the privacy community or have interacted with anyone in the privacy community, you’ve probably heard, how poor Telegram is for user privacy. The default app Telegram is completely clear text is stored on Telegram servers, that are centrally managed and controlled. You don’t gain much privacy by default when using Telegram. There are secret chats which is kind of aside that you can do for E2E encryption, but they’re a little bit more complex, you have to opt into them. There’s a lot of stuff that goes in there. So I know it’s a weird fit for this specifically, but the reason why I bring it up is that Telegram is already something that is very broadly used in the Bitcoin and Monero communities. And ultimately in the world. They have I think last count was 550 million monthly active users. So it’s a very accessible platform, it’s one that many people are already on, it’s a very simple user experience. So it can be a good fit for, in my view a very specific use case, which ultimately is a as a bridge to bring in new users to the circular and parallel economy, and then onboard them onto more private services, once they’ve established reputation or once they’ve built up a certain amount of buys and sells that went successfully, that kind of thing. Just because it is so easy to onboard users there. And then the third and last piece that can be very useful to people who are actually building out economies in Telegram themselves is that there are very powerful bot integrations into Telegram. So you can quickly build autobot that will handle buy-sell offers, that’ll handle connecting people directly et cetera. The options they are really limitless, so that can be a powerful tool for automating some of the overhead there.

Now Signal is probably a tool that many of you are familiar with as well. It’s another one of the most common privacy tools that people talk about. And so it’s an end-to-end encrypted messenger and obviously has a great track record of that. But before we dive into kind of the specifics of Signal, there’s a really interesting concept that I learned and will steal from Juraj Bednar who talks a lot about circular economies in Bitcoin and Lightning specifically. But he talks about this concept of “ethical Vekslaks”, which ultimately Vekslak was somebody in Europe who would help to onboard people coming into a country to trade out their fiat for the local currency so that they could transact. And they would do this outside of the state’s control and not really with the state’s consent, but it was a valuable service that they couldn’t get through kind of the state controlled means. And we really ultimately need the same thing in Monero. I know we’ve talked about a lot of different approaches here, we’ve seen the approach of atomic swaps with Ethereum, we’ve talked a little bit with the Thorchain folks about their approach to onboarding users, but ultimately the most resistant way to do this is just to build out small tight-knit groups in Signal: in your city, in your state, whatever kind of whatever fits best, but build out these groups within Signal to be able to on and off board people to Monero easily and directly. Ultimately again without KYC without tying their ID to all of their transactions, outside of the state’s control, so even if there’s a global ban on Monero, this kind of groups could continue to exist and function.

And the things in Signal that specifically enable this are really that default E2EE encryption that I talked about before. Just like Monero it’s important that in Signal no matter how text-heavy you are or not, you’re gaining these strong privacy guarantees. It’s been proven in court cases, and over and over again, that Signal cannot reveal information about specific messages, can’t reveal the content, even when pressured by law enforcement. So it’s a very powerful tool, especially as in my opinion Monero continues to face stronger and stronger regulatory headwinds, and we really hit more opposition from governments rather than less over the long term.

The last kind of chat focused platform, and this one will probably also be familiar to many of you, who are more active in the Monero community, the protocol itself is called Matrix. There are lots of different clients that you can use with it, Element is the most common client for the Matrix protocol. But Matrix is an excellent protocol, specifically for group chats. It’s kind of an in between in my opinion between Signal and Discord, but obviously it has the strong privacy guarantees that Discord definitely does not have. And it is definitely not on the same level of user experience as Discord, but I guess some those are some of the trade-offs that usually come with tools like this. But it does work very well for those chats, it’s important that they have end-to-end encryption within those chats if you’re doing a closed group, if you’re doing it just open group that anyone can join, encryption is less useful. So you may or may not want to use it there, but ultimately it does allow that end-to-end encryption which enables those strong privacy guarantees that we need.

And then the second piece and one that is really unique to Matrix and the tools that we’re talking about today is the idea that it’s a federated messaging protocol. It’s not one that relies on central servers run by Matrix themselves or run by anyone. You can start up a Matrix server today and host your own rooms, host your own people registration or not, you ultimately have control over not only who knows about your server, but what other home servers you connect to, what you host etc. So that federation allows you to remove a lot of trust from the people actually running the servers, and it also allows you to build these close-knit communities of even multiple home servers within Matrix that you can keep completely separate from the rest of the Matrix network. Ultimately you can run these entirely over Tor as well, so you can build these completely private anonymous chat platforms that only exist within the Tor network, which is especially powerful for parallel economies, but I think will become more and more powerful and necessary for circular economies a long term. And the last note here is just that there’s obviously a strong part of the Monero community already in Matrix, and then the rest of the Monero community is generally an IRC, which is natively bridged to Matrix as well.

So last tools that we will touch on here. These are definitely a little bit different, but ultimately these underlie parallel economies entirely and will continue to become more and more important in building out circular economies. I would assume most of you probably heard of the Tor Network or the Tor Browser. These are tools that that provide strong network level privacy and anonymity usually to people who host services or access services within the Tor Network, and even if you’re accessing things on clearnet through something like Tor Browser you gain strong privacy guarantees.

Tor is something that is absolutely essential to especially on and off boarding from Monero. And we’ve seen this as really the building block for Bisque, which is a decentralized exchange that focuses on Bitcoin, but also does Bitcoin to Monero trades, and it’s also the basis for the Haveno DEX, which is being built right now, and thanks for the Monero community, I’m sure many of you included, helped to fund the next stages for the Haveno decentralized exchange. But neither of those solutions would work without the privacy that Tor allows and without Tor allowing the direct peer-to-peer connections that are necessary without revealing people’s IP address, without losing privacy, all of that stuff.

Tor is also essential for atomic swaps as we heard from Elizabethereum, who was talking through some of the network privacy issues with atomic swaps. Thankfully libraries like libp2p, that she talked about, and most of the atomic swap projects being built are integrating Tor natively. And whenever you have the option I would definitely recommend to use the Tor Network when participating in atomic swaps moving forward.

Tor Browser itself, really quickly to touch on this. Ultimately Tor Browser is the thing that enables parallel economies. This is the way that you access darknet markets. Again parallel economies are much broader than that in concept, but darknet markets are the clear example today. And Tor Browser is really what enables the true free market to be built outside of the control of the state. So when you’re hosting a service within Tor, which ultimately anyone can do, you can host really whatever you want within Tor and provide strong privacy to people accessing your service. All the services that I run for people within the community, all have a Tor version of them as well. So you can access it within the Tor Browser and remain totally private for me in case I was doing any kind of tracking or logging or that kind of thing. But it’s an essential tool for parallel economies again like we touched on, and I think ultimately will become a more vital tool for circular economies as we see states start to crack down more and more on Monero, which I think is the next step as they realize that they can’t break the technology of Monero itself.

So that was the main focus of the talk. The ultimate conclusion is that Monero is something that uniquely enables these circular and parallel economies. Hopefully I got across some of the impetus and the reason for building out these economies, and even if you’re not someone who has to have a circular parallel economy just to survive or thrive, it’s something that you can find a way that you can dive in, you can contribute, maybe you can just start by learning some of these tools, that I talked about today, or getting plugged into a local trading group in your city or state. But ultimately I hope that as many of you as possible will contribute to these circular economies. And then even if you don’t need it today just get familiar with how the parallel economies themselves function, how to access them, so that in the event that you need something that is ultimately only available on a black market, obviously not necessarily drugs, something else that’s necessary, could be medication that’s required that you can’t get at the cost that you can afford, you understand how to access those tools themselves.

So last slide. Just feel free to get in touch my blog is up there sethforprivacy.com, Signal number is up there, feel free to shoot me a message on Signal if you want to connect that way, and then email is seth@sethforprivacy.com. But yeah that’s all I have for the presentation. So do we have any questions? Let’s go for it. I’m not sure where the mics are, okay.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Seth:**_ It’s like the hardest word in the privacy space. Anonymity, yeah.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Seth:**_ Yeah, that’s a very important piece and kind of underlie, something I didn’t touch on, which is that ultimately if you’re trying to do all these things on a potentially compromised operating system, whether it’s infected with malware or there’s something like Windows, which basically is malware, you can lose some of the privacy guarantees of the tools you’re running on top. Not necessarily Windows is obviously terrible, but in many cases it can be okay.

But ultimately it comes down to your specific threat model, which obviously is kind of a non-answer. But if like today you’re just trying to engage in a circular economy, and you’re not necessarily wanting to like engage in a darknet market or something, where you need complete anonymity, and you need that from the ground up, it can be really as simple as just trying to get familiar with an easy to use Linux operating system, like Pop! OS, is the one that I recommend, it’s built on Ubuntu, but it has a lot of great baked in features that simplify the process of transitioning from other operating systems like Windows or Mac. And then for the more hardcore use cases something like Tails which is a Tor native operating system. You can run on a flash drive. You ultimately just flash the image onto a flash drive, you boot from the flash drive. And then it won’t keep anything in storage, it’ll erase everything every time you restart. You can just kind of keep that with you and use it as a tool to access tools or communities, or circular, parallel economies that maybe you want to be more cautious with how that could be tied back to you in any way. And that can be a powerful tool there. It’s not necessarily the most user friendly compared to Windows or Mac OS or anything like that. But it’s an important tool I think just like other ones we talked about. It’s important to try it out, get familiar with it, understand the basics of using it, so that when shit hits the fan you have the knowledge and expertise to just swap over and start using it for what you really need to. Any other questions?

_**Audience:**_ Yes.

_**Seth:**_ Sorry. All right, I hear what you’re saying.

_**Audience:**_ What is one of the best things for a privacy focused person to think about from your opinion?

_**Seth:**_ It really depends on where you are. I mean one of the things that I harp on, and the majority of the content I put out, the conversations I have is that privacy really is a journey and it’s not something where you’ll just be there overnight. You’re not going to go from using Windows to using Tails OS as a daily driver in a city. Like it’s going to be a transition, it’s going to take steps along the way. So it’s really trying to figure out what are the key things that you want to protect, who do you want to protect them from, and then how far are you willing to go to protect those and sacrificing things like maybe usability or easy access to other services, that sort of thing. So it really is a personal question. You have to answer that’s threat modeling, it’s a very simple answer on how threat modeling works. But really just understanding that it is a journey it’s something you need to start somewhere, find maybe a specific tool that you want to start using, maybe it’s flashing a more privacy preserving operating system on your phone, or maybe it’s as simple as starting to onboard your friends and family and Signal, and get them thinking about privacy and communication or something like that. So, yeah, really just that privacy is a journey and that you need to start taking steps, but just understand it’s going to take some time, but it’s well worth the journey. Yeah, thanks.

_**Audience:**_ Thanks I have a specific question about Bisque. You know, Bisque is often like recommended as a great fiat on off ramp, and obviously it looks way better than KYC. But I’ve always been a little bit hesitant, you know, obviously with Bisque. There’s like different types of trades: one might be used to find someone in cash, like in person which would be the best, but like in my city there’s no like LocalMonero and stuff like that, there’s like zero offers in my city. So one of the options with Bisque is like you use Zelle or Venmo, or something like that with someone you don’t know. And to me that’s always been like: ah, that seems like something I don’t want to do. Are those types of trades on Bisque something you’ve done? Do you think the, you know, the hesitancy there for some people to do those type of trades on Bisque are overblown, like what are your thoughts on those type of trades?

_**Seth:**_ Yeah I mean ultimately I do think face-to-face cash is the best option. But obviously that’s not available everywhere. That’s a lot of the reason why. I was harping on this this idea of “ethical Vekslaks”, and people building these tight-knit groups, and Signal or another tool. Obviously Signal’s an example is that we need people to step up to do that. Like if you’re the only person in your city there’s no one else offering trades on LocalMonero or something like that, and you can’t afford to sell some Monero at profit, you can set a margin that you want to make on top of that. That is an immensely valuable thing to Monero as a project and to onboarding people into the circular economy. So ultimately that is the solution is that more and more people step up and take the slight risks that are associated with that, than make profits associated with that, and really fill that role, as far as making trades through digital transaction means like Zelle and that kind of thing. I think ultimately it’s fine, it can especially be an entry point to getting used to it, because obviously like Zelle and other things like that have some protections for you, and are obviously easy. It’s much easier to do a Zelle for Bitcoin transaction, or Zelle for Monero than it is to meet someone face to face maybe in a different city or different state depending on how far away you are. They’re not the ideal ultimately, cash or private groups would be better, but they still don’t directly tie your ID to a Monero transaction in public like. Yes the banks will know that you’ve sent Zelle to this person, but they won’t know hopefully, you’re not putting in like the entry: “Hey, I bought 500 of Monero” or something like that. Like I know there’s memo fields and you definitely should not use those to say what you’re using it for. But they can be a great tool to access that. And the trick that I found is really finding a seller that fits the specific use case you have like, if you’re accountable to sell or you only want to do cash by mail, or whatever try to find a seller that you trust, and then you can build that up over time, build up the amounts that you can do and ultimately find someone that you’re familiar with, you can get comfortable with, and you can use as that on or off boarding platform long term. And then like I mentioned like become that for your local area like, we have people have to step up and do that for things like LocalMonero for things like half an hour to work. People are going to have, to take the leap of faith and get used to that. And it seems daunting at first even doing face-to-face cash seems daunting at first to meet a rando in a parking lot and hand them a lot of cash, and they send you some Monero, it’s a weird feeling. But once you jump into that rabbit hole it really it becomes second nature and becomes something that is very approachable.

_**Audience:**_ Good stuff. Hi, Seth. Alex with the crypto vigilante, yeah, we love your work. Thanks for being here. Two quick questions from the live chat, the virtual conference. One person wants to ask what is the thumb drive that you mentioned, and then the second question was: do you recommend that anyone or everyone should run their own Monero node?

_**Seth:**_ So the thing that I mentioned before was an operating system that’s called Tails OS. Ultimately it’s something you install on a thumb drive or a flash drive and boot from to be able to run it. But it’s essentially a tornado —every communication that’s done entails it’s through Tor, and it’s something that also doesn’t persist storage. So essentially if you download files or whatever you do on there, when you yank that flash drive out everything’s gone, which I know is a pain for the usability perspective, but from the privacy perspective ensures that if you screw up and kept a record of maybe all the trades you made, or the darknet market purchases you made, or whatever depending on what you’re doing, that could come back to bite you if you forgot to delete it or something. So it’s an operating system you install on a flash drive and it is very much worth getting used to.

The second question, running a Monero node, hell yeah, like everyone should be running one. You can run one on a phone, at home on my desk right now I have an old pixel 4a, that’s screen is smashed beyond repair, and it’s running a Monero node and mining Monero as we speak. I mean the beauty of Monero is obviously we have focused on this decentralization of mining, which is a key piece, but also of running a node. And people have put in many, many hours to make that process as easy and approachable as possible. Obviously that’s my most used guide is the one about running a Monero node. That’s one that people use all the time, because it can be a daunting process initially, but once you dive in, it’s really not that complex. And there aren’t really any major risks associated if your threat model is one where you don’t want your ISP to understand that you’re using a Monero or running a Monero node, you probably want to run it Tor only. Obviously there are caveats if your threat model is more advanced, but for most people especially in relatively free countries there’s no risk or anything like that with running it. But definitely make that assessment on your own. But actually running it is pretty straightforward it’s well worth it. You should be transacting through your own node no matter what even though Monero has strong privacy guarantees when using a remote node. It’s still important to use your own and obviously you’re contributing back to the network by doing that.

_**Doug:**_ All right anybody else? All right, we’re probably, we’re gonna have to make this maybe the last two questions and if we could make them relatively quick. Just because we’re getting held up here.

_**Audience:**_ Hey, so if you go on LocalMonero and you buy through cash up or event or whatever, and the person you’re buying from is sketchy, the government has their eye on them, can you get a trouble or investigator for sending money to them, presumably no reason?

_**Seth:**_ So usually the risk is not with the buyer of Monero. Usually if you’re the one buying and selling Monero. There have been cases in the past where people like with LocalBitcoins, which was kind of the OG version of LocalMonero that focused on, LocalBitcoins run by different people, but there were some people who were prosecuted for like money transmission, because they were constantly buying and selling. So there is some risk there as the seller, the person actually selling Monero on the platform, but as the buyer I’ve never heard of anybody being prosecuted or chased down, or anything, because they bought Monero. Obviously that would change depending on where you live, if you’re in another country where maybe the use or even the purchase of Monero is illegal, then I definitely would not recommend using something like cash at Brazil or that kind of thing. To buy it, but in most places it’s not a concern even if it comes back to somehow be tied to you as you having bought Monero then you’re really at the same place you would be if you had bought on a KYC exchange. And even then your information isn’t swept up in general surveillance as it would be on a KYC exchange.

_**Audience:**_ You think that atomic swaps are a good form of privacy or security when buying Monero?

_**Seth:**_ Yeah, I mean ultimately they are the ideal from the cypherpunk perspective, from the privacy perspective, and from the trustless perspective. They obviously suffer from the issue of liquidity, because you have to find a person or an entity to actually do the swap with. So it can be trickier depending on how much you’re trying to buy or sell, or when to find a swap partner. But I think ultimately that will be basically not an issue for normal people, very quickly, once we have, especially once we have like Farcaster atomic swaps live for Bitcoin or once the Ethereum-Monero atomic swaps go live. They definitely are the ideal, but they do have the trade-offs of they are peer-to-peer, so you have the just the issues of liquidity, and that kind of thing, but ultimately if they’re done over Tor they’re very private from a network perspective. Unfortunately every other chain is awful as far as privacy is concerned, so there’ usually some chance that it could be linked back to a swap with Monero, but assuming you move the Monero right after you swap, or use a different wallet, that kind of thing, there’s not really any concern there. So ultimately I do think they are the ideal, and that’s why I’m so excited that things like Farcaster are being built out, that things like Haveno will use atomic swaps natively, when they’re live, and they’re an immensely valuable tool there. Thank you.

Yeah it is very dark up here I feel like I’m talking at night. So I think, okay, we’ll do one more, because I have no idea where Doug. Just really quick touching on how he was asking about the LocalMonero and finding someone. Are there anyone here at the Monerotopia that is selling Monero for cash, like that we can maybe make a connection potentially? I mean I would assume so like mention earlier it’s kind of discover amongst yourselves, and if anyone wants to announce it, they’re obviously free too. But all right okay awesome well Doug’s rolling up and I think we’ll move on to the next thing. Thank you everybody for having me, and thank you for letting me chat with you all.

Just real quick at the end of this talk: if you anybody who wants to join us, we’re going to create a Signal group here in Miami to create a circular economy and take Seth’s. advice I just come on over here after the talk. Yeah, thank you for doing that it’s exciting nice.
