# Lee Clagett

_**Lee Clagett on Hiding the Rings: The Importance of P2P Encryption in Monero – Monerotopia 2022**_

_Introduction - Lee Clagett "VTnerd", a Monero Developer and an XMR p2p Network Expert, speaks on Hiding the Rings: The Importance of P2P Encryption in Monero, at the Monerotopia 2022 #XMR4ALL event!_

[https://youtu.be/c1S7U8WCVgg](https://youtu.be/c1S7U8WCVgg)

---

_**Doug:**_ Lee Clagett by the way is the guy who’s gonna be talking about this. He’s one of the core devs and his focus is on network decentralization is what I would call it, maybe you call it something else.

_**Lee:**_ Yeah, that’s pretty good, yeah. This talk is specifically about encrypting the Monero P2P links, which has not been done yet. I guess I could just start without, so that…

_**Doug:**_ Yeah try to talk really quick and loud, trying to be as loud as me yeah.

_**Lee:**_ Okay, yeah. So I’m gonna try to just talk through the first couple slides, because there’s really not much to see. So there we go.

So the title is just “Hiding the Rings”, so this is about the importance of P2P encryption. There’s certain cases where you’re the real member of the ring which can be revealed still currently today. And it’s a result of this unencrypted traffic. So this is what this talk is about primarily.

So skip there’s a blank slide, skip ahead at least, right. So for those that don’t know, I’ve been around since 2016, when fluffypony encouraged me to come to Monero. And I’ve been sort of crowdfunded since 2020 to do various…
mostly it’s been Monero core related stuff, a lot of P2P stuff, and so there’s been optimization work, there’s been kind of just all over the place really, a lot of wallet work too. So go ahead on the next slide.

So the primary, at a high level, the most of Monero was focused on blockchain privacy. That’s a big difference between, you know, Bitcoin. But there hasn’t been a lot of talk about TCP/IP privacy. Now this is important for unless the highlighted red is for coin tracking. There’s also issues with obviously as you add encryption, there’s a higher probability of errors, like remote code execution and data dumps like log4j. But for Monero’s purposes this added security risk, is probably worth it, because you can actually track coins still today at the ISP level. So if you skip to the next slide, I don’t know if you can see the I had a cool diagram.

So when you go online, later you’ll see this, but basically if an ISP can determine that two transactions came from the same IP, the change address appears in the ring signature, so if they know that both transactions came from the same IP, they effectively know the real… I’m sorry can you skip to the next slide, so I’m not sure if you guys can see this back, in the back there, but basically the change output appears immediately in the next ring signature at times. So if the ISP is monitoring all traffic, and you’re not using I2P or Tor, they’re still going to know the real ring member effectively. So this is the primary focus of the P2P encryption is to close this loop to make sure, that even if you’re not using I2P or Tor that the real ring member is still protect, still hidden from outside passive observers, so if you skip let me see the next slide here, yeah skip to the next slide, so at a high level what’s happening is I2P and Tor protect against both ISP spies and P2P spy. So the difference is the ISP would be, well, you know, we won’t mention any names, but your cable company they could monitor your traffic. I2P and Tor protects against that because it’s encrypted. They also protect against P2P spy. So this Bitcoin has this big issue, where some of the blockchain analysis companies connect to tons of nodes in the network. And their goal was to identify where the transaction started from. They can do this without being an ISP, because it’s all statistics on the way the transaction gets propagated.

So Dandelion++, which I implemented, that was part of the CCS, I did probably two years ago, this was actually fundamental resource for Bitcoin. They still haven’t implemented it. So Monero has been using it for at least 18 months now. This protects against those P2P spies, this protects against those companies, blockchain analysis companies that were connecting to tons of nodes, it makes them harder to track internally that way. However if they coordinate with an ISP they can still do some tracking, because the traffic is unencrypted. If you’re concerned about that right now, what you do is you use I2P or Tor. But that’s not always available. Some people aren’t using it, and so we’d like to improve this, because anybody that’s not using I2P or Tor is effectively leaking their real ring member, which hurts everybody’s privacy.

So we pretty much have to implement some encryption. It was just a matter of “do we use TLS SSL or do we use the new fancy Noise protocol, which Lightning Network is using, WireGuard is using, Bitcoin is doing something similar but slightly different, I2P is also, as I’ll discuss, using something similar, so, oh, you’ve already skipped to the… well, yeah you can go back to… So the only thing I was going to point out is Monero’s design is going to be more similar to what I2P is doing.  So I2P was based on the Noise protocol, and they made some adaptations. And Monero is going to be doing. It’s not going to be competing with I2P, it’s going to have a similar design in the way the channels are encrypted. And so I2P was designed to be more stealth-like than TLS, it’s harder to identify with DPI engines, so this is where the ISP may try to run a pattern matching search to determine what the traffic is I2P has made. This a little bit more difficult, it’s not impossible, but you have to monitor, you actually have to join the P2P network to know that someone’s using Monero is the ultimate goal. We can’t really defend against that, because if they’re part of the network, and they’re collecting IP-addresses, they’re going to know that you’re using Monero. But we prevent a lot of this passive spying, and we prevent sort of these this ring member issue that I just discussed a second ago. So go ahead into the next slide.

This is pretty technical, someone like the knowers will love this. I was already showing them actually, because they had not actually seen this technique that I2P uses. But basically from bite zero on it should all be effectively random bytes or it should look pseudo random, I think, would be the phrase. So this will make it harder for ISPs that actually detect that it’s Monero traffic without doing additional work, meaning if you use TLS they can pretty much tell it immediately that it’s TLS. This technique they won’t be able to tell whether it’s Lightning Network, whether it’s  I2P, or whether it’s Monero or any of these other new projects that are using Noise protocol. They actually have to do a little bit more analysis to determine what is inside the payload. Now typically they can determine based on just packet sizes and everything, but it’s not that simple. They actually have to do a little bit more work I suppose. The primary benefit to Monero is preventing like the ISPs from just blocking Monero traffic. That’s one of the reasons why I2P does it this way. And that’s a secondary use case. The primary use case is just making sure that it’s encrypted. So go ahead and finally jump to this.

So the one problem with this approach is we still have default port numbers. And so I’m going to be talking to people a lot about that today there’s probably going to be a more for super paranoid people, where if it’s using the default Monero port number, it won’t even use that. That’ll make it really hard for ISPs to determine they’re using Monero. They’ll actually have to join the P2P network, to actually monitor the traffic. As I said the entire stream is pretty much I should have said pseudo-random, it says random, it’s actually pseudo-random because it’s not… if you know what’s being, sent you can actually decrypt it although, because if it was truly random the receiver would, you know, couldn’t do anything with it. The only downside of this is if we make this mandatory nodes that have not been online since a couple hard forks will have to re-bootstrap from the very beginning. Basically the way it’s going to work is that every i-port pair will have a public key, which is used as part of the encryption technique. But if they’ve been offline for a couple hard forks, they won’t have any public keys. So you pretty much have to start from the beginning. They have to reconnect to the what’s called the bootstrap nodes. For those who don’t know, there’s hard-coded IP-addresses and DNS-addresses, so even though it’s decentralized, it has to start with a fixed centralized starting point to learn other IP-addresses of the network. Once it’s been bootstrapped it’s usually pretty secure as far as decentralization goes. So I don’t really have a good technique for that other than we slowly roll out this encryption. I have plans for that, but it’ll have to be, if you haven’t run your Monero node in over a year, you basically have to re-bootstrap from the beginning. So I don’t really have any this… it’s gonna have to be that way I think. So go ahead to the I think there’s just more, right.

So to be clear this is not gonna be competing with I2P and Tor. The goal is primarily making the link encrypted so ISPs cannot easily determine your ring members and basically do blockchain analysis that way. I kind of mentioned already, it’s not going to be authentication based, it’s going to be very similar what Bitcoin is doing. The term they use is “opportunistic encryption”. Basically authentication is really difficult, because you have to associate a public key to an IP-address. And the best way to do that is with a blockchain.

And so I realized when I was going down this route, I was basically redoing Namecoin in Monero. So I stopped and said: “We’re gonna do version zero, we’re not gonna do authentication. It’s gonna be sort of a Bitcoin assuming opportunistic. Opportunistic means, someone could say: “Hey this guy in the front row, I know his IP-address, I know his public key”, but they could be lying and it could be a man on the middle technique. We can’t really prevent that, unless you do use a blockchain to store all this information. So I talked to Sarang and he sort of gave this look like: I’m solving like four problems at once. If I go down that route so version zero is going to be similar to Bitcoin and what Lightning Network, what is called opportunistic encryption. It attempts based on what the peers are telling you to connect and decrypt the packets in most cases. This will be no issue, but there will be rare edge cases, where there’ll be man in the middle of techniques. If someone was really aggressive. However to pull this off they will have to connect to the Monero P2P network and give false information to people. So this won’t be passive, it’ll be an active attack, which could be spotted by other people in the Monero network. This is in contrast to a technique of decryption, where they can make a man in the middle without having ever connecting to the Monero network. So it will be designed so they have to connect to the Monero network to pull off the man in the middle, and so in theory we can spot this.

That’s the difference between, I know there’s pretty high level, but there’s actually three levels there’s no authentication, there’s sort of this middle layer, where you actually have to connect to the network and fool people. And the third one is you use a blockchain for it, which is really hard to spoof. But that’s for effectively redoing Namecoin at that point. And so this is what the last bullet point about — there’s I’d say no authentication, that’s probably technically incorrect, there’s some, but it’s not what people expect, because when I propose this everyone goes: “Well, why isn’t there like SSH authentication?” It’s like, well decentralized authentication is a big problem. It’s like its own, it’s literally its own blockchain, that’s why Naimcoin exist. So go ahead on to the next slide.

So the next side I’m talking about: how are we gonna upgrade potentially to new things. It’s part of the handshake, there’s gonna be a version number. And at each hard fork I think my plan is there’s gonna be two allowable versions of the encryption. So the recipient will try the newest version number, and it fails will then fall back to the old version number handshake. And so that will help, will handle upgrades. We’ll have at least two active at all times. Well after thinking about it somewhere probably have to make encryption mandatory on the network, because of this privacy leak. So at some point there’ll be a release where encryption is optional, and the fallback is the, you know, the current unencrypted node and then the next release after that will be mandatory encryption, and then future upgrades will have two encryption versions going. I think that’s how we’re gonna have to handle it, because again, because it’s private, I was thinking about making it permanently optional for security reasons, but the problem is privacy we’ll probably have to make it mandatory and roll it out that way. So I think I’ve got most of it covered and I’m sure moo and well if moo here he’ll give me, well he or she will, if you know moo he or she, I’ve often wondered whether moo is always quietly sitting in these talks, but I think moo just sits at home and just shakes his head at me.

So again I talked about some of these concerns. One of the concerns is that this custom P2P traffic doesn’t actually hide the Monero traffic completely. That’s really difficult problem to do, because if someone really wants to know they’re using Monero, it’s pretty hard to like, if there’s a 10 person team, and they’re like: “We’re going to find out if this person’s using Monero”. It’s pretty difficult to defend against that. So at first I didn’t know whether we should use a Noise protocol, because it’s a lot of custom encryption. But then Sarang reminded me that Monero is nothing but custom encryption, so why not just this is actually pretty so but compared to bulletproof this is like you know this is pretty basic, I can see.

So the other problem, I’m a little worried about, is that this will induce some overhead latency. So block propagation will slow down, and this is probably the reason why Bitcoin has never actually implemented this mode. They’ve talked about this you can see me at least six, no wait a minute, at least six years maybe eight years ago talking on Bitcoin dev and giving them suggestions about their encryption mode. They’ve never actually rolled it out, and I think one of the issues they have is it slows down block propagation, because the decryption takes CPU time and this slows the latency down. So before you can even validate the block header you have to decrypt it. So with Bitcoin they’re all about decentralized mining and actually so it was Monero. But unfortunately because of this privacy issue I don’t really see, I’m gonna talk to Seth right, okay I’ve never met him before, so this is always great. But I need, I’m going to talk to some people, I don’t see how I way around, I think we have to make it mandatory despite the latency issues. There can always be techniques where on the back end core mining groups send messages back and forth without encryption possibly. I mean we can’t really prevent that entirely anyway. So we might also just let it happen.

And then the other concern is that this will this potentially cause some more denial service issues. So when you’re running your home node, a lot of people don’t think about this, but you’re running your server at your house, and there’s potentially that someone could just overload your home server. So well I have some mitigation techniques that’s already discussed in the slide, no one seemed to have any issues with those, but there’ll be additional modifications to a Monero rejects incoming traffic. So that it doesn’t get overloaded doing new decryption.

And so I think, yeah we’ll go ahead and I think I’ve pretty much covered, all the bases, so this is for any questions. Also I did mention in Doug thought that I was I had some wallet, I did so. I have other project ideas. But that’s you want to talk about those, we’ll talk about that after the talk. But if there’s any questions about…

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Lee:**_ So the question was about additional latency on the verification time. Correct? When you receive a transaction? Increase latency.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Lee:**_ Oh, all right. So somewhat relative time, so relative time there’s so much time spent, the bulk of the time is actually spent verifying transactions, if you look at the timing analysis. So what typically happens is when you get a block, ideally you know all the transactions up front, because that the heaviest lifting is actually doing all the Bulletproof stuff, and doing the pretty much all that like, all the confidential transaction stuff. The block header is fairly quick, because it’s hashes in, I don’t know, my guess is that it’s probably going to be slightly more or no, no, because it’s I’m always saying so just to initiate the connection it’s going to be fairly expensive, that’s why I’m worried about denial service. But the decryption is probably going to use ChaCha, so it’s gonna be fairly quick as far as I’ve never imagined. I’m gonna take a guess and say the block verification could be quicker simply because… it should be quicker but the code is not. So it has to do a pack everything into a specific big pattern, make sure that it’s valid and then do a bunch of hashes. You know, I think that the decryption is going to be faster actually because we can optimize that code that’d be my guess. But this is just I haven’t run the numbers, but if we may have to run those numbers if you’re curious it won’t be, I mean, we’re talking probably like 100 milliseconds of decrypted most or something like that. I don’t know, right, it’s gotta be less than that, I think it’s probably in the microseconds, actually I don’t know. Do you know what ChaCha decryption, Aaron would know, but well we can run those numbers. The basic problem is that in my opinion there could be some optimizations done in the block header verification also. So there’s that.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Lee:**_ Yeah, that’s, I can’t hear what you just said… oh, right, I forgot about RandomX entirely, right. So yeah the decryption time’s gonna be way faster, sorry. I forgot about the craziness not craziness but it’s an interesting, yes. The encryption is going to be much, much faster, you’re right. I’m sorry. So that you know and so actually compared to Bitcoin, that’s why Bitcoin does cares, because Bitcoin has a much hash faster proof of work algorithm, and a lot of it can go to hardware. We can’t go to hardware the way Bitcoin. Bitcoin they can literally send the most CPUs have a shot two instruction they can just fire their block headers at and we don’t. That’s the whole point we have to do a bunch of random instructions to verify it. So yeah, I forgot about that, yeah. The encryption’s gonna, the decryption is gonna be much faster, it’s gonna be, I don’t know, like probably like a thousand times faster or something like that.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Lee:**_ What was the question? What is the risk of running a node? So the biggest risk that I’ve been concerned with is adding some remote code execution vulnerability or adding some log4j stuff, where because you’re adding encryption, decryption you have to copy the packets more, you have there’s a lot more just overall code to handle it. The most complicated code is in the initial setup. Once the handshake has been done the decryption is pretty straightforward, but there’s always a risk of doing a heartbleed kind of situation where: oops we’re leaking a bunch of secret material, or oops, look like log4j, we’re just dumping out logs unintentionally. So there’s always a risk. But I think in the end because these ISPs can effectively break your ring members, we’re probably going to have to just accept that risk like we’ve accepted complexity of transactions, yeah. It’s gonna have to be just an acceptable. Now thankfully there’s tons of, oh I’m not basing this, so the actual handshake is based on the Noise protocol, which has been verified, been formally verified by researchers. It’s not entirely new. It’s just that some of the obfuscation techniques are new to, are unique to I2P that I’m using. But otherwise it’s pretty much a protocol that has that someone else has designed, that’s been formally audited, so there’s no, there’s little risk of it bombing that way, just by implementation risk is the main issue. Does that answer your question?

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Lee:**_ I got that. So you’re running a node and there’s something else in your computer? Can you hear?...

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Lee:**_ Yes it’s going to add some risk, it’s just harder to find that risk, because you’re effectively running your own server, it would be like running, it’s like asking does running a http server at house increase your risk of being hacked. The answer is yes, because you weren’t running a node before. So you by definition, it’s increasing your risk, it’s impossible, I’d be lying to you, but if I said otherwise, because it’s, you know, this is some, it’s gonna be like a math theorem for this, if you’re running a server in your house is increasing the right risk.

_**Audience:**_ Real quick question or a note to you on what you’re mentioning about the decryption. I definitely don’t view that overhead as being too problematic in Monero, since we don’t have these highly optimized Monero pools and P2Pool as well will I think lessen the impact, since you’ll have individual miners.

_**Lee:**_ I guess yes. I’ve got an incredible amount of patches that no one’s ever seen, where I’m attempting to optimize P2P stuff and it usually stops, because I’m like 98 percent of the way there and I realized: oh this isn’t going to work at the last second. But there’s lots of optimization work to be done at the P2P layer. So like you said it’s not really that much, and then I forgot about RandomX. RandomX for better or worse choose up so much dominates so much of the CPU time that the decryption is going to be, the ChaCha decryption is going to be so… For those who know, ChaCha there’s no I finally know there’s no hardware implementation accelerates it, but it’s been designed to work with all hardware efficiently. So even if you’re running an ARM processor it’s going to decrypt pretty quickly, where AES is not the case it’s sort of heavily dependence on hardware, whereas ChaCha is been used for SSH and a lot of real-time protocols, because it’s very quick to decrypt even with ARM processors or even with some of these other weird MIPS processors that no one that like ubiquity uses no one else does.

_**Audience:**_ A quick question about what you mentioned earlier as well. You mentioned not allowing fallback to plain text or eventually encryption or clear communication. That seems a little bit dangerous to not allow, I understand that is the default, but not allowing it sounds pretty risky, just like something’s broken you could essentially bring down the entire P2P network, or if there was a specific DoS vector that required.

_**Lee:**_ Yeah, it was a proposal I’ve done, and I’m not sure whether I’m actually going to implement, because I think what I’m going to do initially is that it’s going to be optional, and it’s going to be proposal like the first go around, the first there’s going to be a, it really doesn’t even have to roll out with a hardware, but there’s going to be a release where encryption comes on by default, but it’s optional. And then we’ll delay that what you’re proposing to leave, because like it needs to get up and running first, and then we can have that discussion second. But I agree that’s one of the issues like if I botch some, if there’s broken code, and that that complex header thing, effectively the whole P2P network gets locked out, and the miners might be mining with each other, but no one really knows about. It like there’s, for those who don’t know, what Seth is referring to here, is there’s lots of weird edge cases where you can effectively create a network fork, like as if the like the Great Wall of China had just sanctioned off a whole bunch of machines you can do that yourself by writing buggy code. And so this has happened, this is really happened in the great world of cryptocurrencies and we hope to not bring this anti-feature to Monero.

_**Audience:**_ Yeah, I think definitely a fallback as just a last case, but keeping the default as encrypted as a long term…

_**Lee:**_ Yeah, I’m not sure it’ll have to be. What we don’t want is I think, you know, I think in the end it’ll be okay, because what we don’t want is people aggressively choosing it. But if they are, no I think, you’re, I think, you’re right. After I’m gonna talk to you about this later, but yeah, I think you’re on a percentage we’re always gonna have that fallback, because if the person wants to reveal the ring member they’re going to do it anyway. So we might as well just aggressively make it the default, but would not never enforce it right. I think you’re right on that.

_**Audience:**_ Okay, it’s opt out privacy, just like the Monero protocol — you default get it yeah, you just opt out, if you want.

_**Lee:**_ I keep forgetting that in my head, I’m like but people are going to choose to opt out, but there you can’t, yeah. So anyway, so that all the slides are wrong, Seth just pointed out. We’re gonna, it’s gonna be, we’re gonna push the encryption mode but we’re not gonna make it mandatory. And then I think between hardforks will definitely have a mode where it there’s only two in cycle at a time, because that’s only way to really handle the version upgrades. That’s the handle if someone want to do a blockchain thing, where we started associating public keys to an IP-address on the blockchain, that would really make it hard to do “man in the middle”, and that would really make Eclipse attacks difficult. But then would have to have basically Namecoin embedded within Monero, and I don’t know that we want to do that. Is anybody else going to take a mic?

_**Audience:**_ Hello, I will give you a mic.

_**Lee:**_ If only he commented on the PR, you know. There’s like a million PRs though.

_**Audience:**_ You mentioned that nodes that are a couple hard forks behind are going to have to resync from the bootstrap nodes.

_**Lee:**_ So in the end, as he was just commenting, probably not now, because we if we don’t make it mandatory, we might be able to say so. So ask your question first, because it may still come up, but go ahead and finish your question. I apologize I cut you off.

_**Audience:**_ Are there any efforts currently out there to decentralize the process of bootstrapping?

_**Lee:**_ Right, everyone asks about this. You really can’t do better than. So everyone comes up with this idea, and the problem you have to remember is you need a starting point. So everyone comes up: well why can’t we decentralize it? Well you can like, one of the ways you can decentralize it is you can share a bunch of IP-addresses and share your own custom version with each other in this room, and then bootstrap off other people in the room. You just have to make sure that collectively you all get back to the same. There’s lots of like confusing scenarios, where you end up on an entirely separate network, because you communicated with these three people, and they just, you know, they worked with some government somewhere, and then you’re off on your private Monero and don’t even know. And then there’s the other possibility that most of the techniques actually devolve to the same centralization technique. So this is a fight that we had hopefully with Diego, not Diego, the Kovri, the guy was paid to develop Kovri. We would argue with him constantly that he had all these ideas, but the problem was he just made it really complicated, and it just devolved the same. The best you can really do is maybe have multiple projects with different IP-addresses, with different owners that all bootstrap the same network. Beyond that I don’t see how you can really do it. You basically have to have multiple Monero repos, where the only difference is the hard-coded IP-addresses at all point. But otherwise because you have to at least know one member that’s of the legitimate network to get into the network, if you don’t have one of those you can before that’s one way. You can get an Eclipse attack if you never get a legitimate IP to the real network. Yeah it’s like a chicken and egg problem. It seems really simple until you realize well how do you even know what the real network is.

_**Audience:**_ Yeah, I remember back in the day the only solution was custom DNS servers that would return what you’re looking for.

_**Lee:**_ Yeah we have DNS servers, we don’t really use them. I think the only other episode is we just have multiple repos, I don’t know anyone just done that. The way, and Seth can tell you, the way we handle is it’s some big time contributors are allowed to give their own IP-address of a node they’re running. So there’s several people that are completely anonymous I think to pretty much everyone in the community, that have submitted a patch, submitted their IP-address, and it’s hard coded in there. And who exactly is running and managing that other than there have been a long time contributor on GitHub. That’s probably the best way I’ve seen us to anonymize it. And that one’s actually pretty effective, because there’s at least two IP-addresses on there. I’m not sure if anyone fully knows their full identity.

_**Audience:**_ Thank you.

_**Doug:**_ All right any other questions guest?

_**Lee:**_ Really has a break after this right everyone can just…

_**Audience:**_ Can you hear me?

_**Lee:**_ Yep.

_**Audience:**_ Okay, so this may be off topic, but I was wondering like, have you talked about, is there going to be like a layer or two for the Monero blockchain, and if so, what’s going to differentiate from layer one?

_**Lee:**_ That is someone else is discussing that here today I think I saw that in…

_**Doug:**_ Yeah, no we don’t have any that’s talk about a layer two, specifically on Monero, not like a Lightning thing. We have people that are going to be talking about it. Basically interoperating with Monero, so Tor chain and Haven, well it’s really Tor chain. And then we have somebody that’s going to be talking about Bitcoin to, I mean Monero to Ethereum atomic swaps. So nobody talking directly about a second layer, but effectively Monero being able to interoperate with other cryptos. But there are talks that I’ve done on Monero Talk.

_**Lee:**_ Fine. One person to find is Justin Berman, because I talked to him yesterday working. I’m convinced that you can’t have privacy on Lightning Network. So it may reduce privacy if you had a layer two, so that’s something else to think about.

_**Doug:**_ But yeah bottom line there’s absolutely no reason why you can’t have something like a Lightning Network on top of Monero. And there are people that are already writing papers about it and talking about it. We’re supposed to have one of those guys here today, but he’s not here. But you could go to Monero Talk and you could see some of my older talks, and we have discussion there.

_**Audience:**_ The reason why I asked is because like a speaker earlier was speaking about how like certain protocols can get kind of stale. So I was wondering if there’s going to be any upgrades next markets what we don’t want is it to get stale.

_**Lee:**_ Monero… so a good one to listen to is Justin just did an interview outside a couple talks ago, and if you can find that online it’s great, because Justin sort of actually talked about this with Rafael. Monero does upgrades because we’re focused around privacy. So it’s pretty easy for us to upgrade. We say: this feature helps with privacy, and everyone reviews it and agrees. And we do a protocol upgrade. So there’s less contention than in Bitcoin, because Monero has a specific focus, where Bitcoin almost is like Bitcoin at this point is almost trying to claiming to do everything, whereas Monero is much more narrowly focused on fungibility digital cash and privacy. So protocol upgrades are as long as they’re within that realm, they’re easier, if they’re “let’s add a Bitcoin scripting language to it”, then that’s probably not gonna go over too well, unless there’s a lot of work done. But typically protocol upgrades are much easier than Bitcoin, because there’s a more core group of people focus on a specific goal as opposed to what whatever Bitcoin is trying to do at this point.

_**Doug:**_ Yeah, I think the point that the speaker was trying to make earlier is that you need to evolve, especially if you’re trying to be a privacy coin, because it’s a constant battle. And that is definitely part of the Monero culture. Monero used to up until recently, was upgrading essentially every six months. The goal is to push, you know, extend that amount of time, as time goes on, because ideally you won’t need to upgrade as much. But even now today Monero’s still upgrading every so often, upgrading the protocol.

_**Audience:**_ Just one more question, so this is kind of maybe off topic, but web3 like there’s so many discussion about web3. So how is Monero going to play in the web3?

_**Lee:**_ So I don’t know much about web3, other than I do have some other wallet ideas, multicurrency wallet. When I was talking to Doug earlier, I really want to do a communication wallet surrounded around Monero. So it’s not really web3 other than group chat communication. And so I have some other ideas about this. Oh no actually then, I also yeah, I’ll talk about this later. This is it, I have some ideas for it, but I don’t know that anyone’s really, but there’s any core group of people focusing on it. But I do have a couple project ideas about that, but whether they come to fruition, I can’t say, because I’ve got a lot to do.

_**Doug:**_ You might, my response to that Monero digital cash first, and trying to get that, that’s its primary focus. But like I was saying earlier Monero is interoperating with other protocols, Secret Network is one of them, you can do DeFi essentially with Monero, with wrapped Monero. fluffypony just announced recently without giving too much details on how he’s working on some kind of wrapped Monero concept, so you’d be able to do DeFi with that. Like I said earlier we’re gonna have Tor chain here, Tor chain is currently figuring out how to add Monero, so you’d be able to seamlessly swap between Monero and other cryptos that are already connected to Tor chain. Haven is one of them that people are interested in, and Haven is built on actually the Monero protocol. So Haven team is the team that’s helping to do that work to now add Monero to Tor chain. But to answer your question that’s going to then lead to other things right so like DeFi on Monero through these other protocols.


I’m going to wrap it up here just so we can stay on schedule. Thank you so much man, greatly appreciate it.
