# Chad Thackray

_**Chad Thackray on Monero’s price profile: Why it matters - Monerotopia 2022**_

_Introduction - Software Developer, Chad Thackray speaks on Monero’s price profile and why it matter, at the Monerotopia 2022 #XMR4ALL event!_

[https://youtu.be/05W1lrhY1S0](https://youtu.be/05W1lrhY1S0)

---

_**Doug:**_ And that’s Chad Thackray here. Our next speaker, all right. Here he is. Very cool. I interviewed him as well. Most of these people have been interviewed already on Monerotalk. This was also one of our most viewed, recently most viewed videos. People are interested in this, Chad. So this is gonna be more price talk. And like I said, I like price talk, I like hearing about it. And Chad does it in a very seemingly objective way. So go for it.

_**Chad:**_ All right. Are we all? Yeah. Okay. So I’m gonna be talking basically about price in general, and like why we should actually care about price. I think there’s often an instinctive reaction to kind of dismiss any talk about price, about price targets, about whether it goes up or down. And I’m not sure that’s ultimately the right attitude at the end of the day. So if you go to the next slide.

So a little bit about me. I started out as a mathematician. So there might be a bit of jargon in here, if you don’t get it, just yell at me or something, I’ll sort out. I then went into sort of, you know, banking software development kind of thing. And these days I run a YouTube channel on algo training and just how to do stuff in Python. So you can check that out if you’re a programmer, you want to learn about that kind of stuff. Next slide, please.

So yeah, my motivation for writing this talk is that price is seen as a dirty word basically. It’s, you know, it’s something we don’t talk about, it’s pushed aside, it’s seen as like a… that’s something we don’t talk about. We only talk about the pure tech. I’m gonna put forward the proposition that ultimately price is actually important, and I’m gonna lay that out. There’s often the common viewpoint that Monero works just as well at like a low dollar amount, like one dollar than it does at a thousand dollars. And I’m not entirely convinced about that, so I’m gonna do that as well. Next slide, please.

So two basic problem approach here. The first one: we’re just going to talk about why do we care about price, why is price important. We talk about NGU technology and that kind of thing. And then in the second half we’re going to mostly be talking about some data science models that try to look at the growth of the price so far, model it, and just see what we can learn from that. So we’re gonna get into those charts later on. But for now we’ll just talk about what we actually care. Next slide, please.

So there are three main things that we care about in terms of price. The first one probably being liquidity. Pretty important. If, you know, if the market cap isn’t sufficient, you’re not going to be able to quickly get in and out of the market, especially if you’re trading like really large amounts. It’s gonna be pretty difficult for you to get in and out of the market at a reasonable rate without getting absolutely destroyed on the spread. Second factor is security. So I’ll go into that, you know, general blockchain security, block reward, that kind of thing. And then the third one is just, I mean, I would put forward the proposition that the price increase is basically necessary or at least, you know, a market cap increase, more money in the system is necessary if Monero is going to become like a global digital cash. So next slide, please.

So in terms of liquidity, you can think about it like this, if you just equally distribute all of the Monero right now, we ignore, you know, what would happen in the markets as a result of that. But there’s not enough for everyone on earth to have like one dollar worth, the market has only about four billion at the minute. So, you know, that if everyone on earth is gonna have a Monero wallet, and they’re going to store their cash like they would in their real wallet, some things have got to change basically. So, next slide.

So there’s also problem with slippage at the minute. So I just sort of went logged on to Binance the other day, and I looked at how much slippage I would encounter if I were to buy a million dollars worth of Monero, which market buy. For Monero but it was like nine percent by the time I checked it, whereas for something like Bitcoin with a bit more, a lot more liquidity in the system you’re only going to lose like 0,1 percent. So again this is only a problem depending on how you see Monero being used. If you think it’s just going to be mostly, you know, small transactions, maybe we’re not going to be doing market buying a million dollars, but if you see larger companies using it, it’s going to become important that we don’t have this nine percent spread, you know. Obviously there are strategies that you can use rather than just market buying to try and reduce that, but something worth bearing in mind at least. So, next slide.

Security is another reason to care about price. The current block reward is about 150 dollars. So with 720 blocks per day that’s about 100 000 dollars a day basically of security fees paid to the miners. Now you can get into lots of discussions about ASICs and that kind of thing, but the simplest way to look at it is just look at how much you’re actually paying the miners, and the market will sort out the security. That’s roughly analogous to how much Bitcoin was paid out to miners in 2013. So that’s roughly where Monero is today. So we’re still pretty early really. There are other options to increase the amount of money that goes to miners. You could increase the block reward directly, but that creates inflation, no one likes inflation. And you can also increase fees, but again the whole point is to have low fees, so we don’t want to do that. Therefore the only realistic approach we have to increase the amount of security by paying more to the miners is for the price to increase. Next slide.

Developers are also paid in Monero. So if Monero becomes widely known as, you know, an asset that’s not going anywhere, it’s just declining, you’re probably going to have trouble attracting good quality developers, as that could be a real problem security-wise. And yeah the price increase, it rewards the people who are committed to privacy, and who’ve been in there the longest. So ultimately you’re giving these people more capital which they’re going to allocate to more privacy related projects, whether that’s Monero directly or something else. And NGU also makes it more difficult to delist Monero again, whether you care about delisting is I guess a matter of opinion, but it was only so easy to delist a Monero because it makes up such a small amount of the volume. This is less odious for exchanges to delist something like Dogecoin, they don’t make very much money on it probably as comparison to Bitcoin. So with having such a low market cap and trading volume pretty easy for the regulators to come in and the exchanges just rolled over, at least in England right from. So next slide, please.

So I hope that I’ve kind of made the point that some kind of price increase is required. It is necessary, but not sufficient for Monero to become a digital cash. And the extent to which you see that basically depends on where you see Monero going. So if you see Monero as just something like a, you know, like a niche thing used by the enthusiasts, then you can say: we’re there already. But if you want to become like, you know, like a real digital cash that’s used globally, then we’ve got a fair way to go, we’re not gonna get there with a four billion dollar market cap. So next slide.

So we’re gonna look at a few statistical models here, just like the previous price history in Monero. And I just thought about a few clarifiers up here, again this is a topic that kind of divides people. So some people will imbue magical properties to statistical models, I think they can, you know, predict the future with them. Some people just dismiss them completely. But I would say it’s like more of a statistical fact can be useful to inform any and all speculation caveat. We have a lot less price data than we do for Bitcoin, so, you know, there’s less we can do really. So next slide.

So thanks to the lovely work of our core developers. We don’t have much in the way of on-chain data, but we do have things like transaction volume, which we can use. So this chart, if you can see, it is basically a just a graph of the number of daily transactions. I’ve smoothed it out a bit, otherwise it would be way too spiky. And basically what we’ve seen since 2015 is uninterrupted growth basically. Even during the bear market there wasn’t really a large decrease in the volume of transactions. So the actual amount of transactions being used. We can’t get things like the actual volume of Monero traded backwards and forwards, we can’t get that. But as far as the actual amount of transactions goes, it’s pretty much just been opened up since just beginning really. And we’re kind of see on like 20 000 transactions a day. So go to the next slide.

You get an interesting indicator if you divide the price by the transactions per day, can give you some sort of idea of whether the rate of increase in the price is outpacing the number of transactions, which would probably indicate we’re entering more of a speculative territory. So you should be a bit careful, maybe. You’ll notice that while Monero price is pretty similar to what it was in 2017, this indicator is a much lower level, mainly because the growth in use the volume of transactions has increased lockstep with it. So we’re basically going sideways which is more of an indicator of actual organic growth rather than just, you know, fervent speculation. The y-axis there is logged so that’s not much sense, but yeah. Next slide.

So you can look at things, you know, if you want to just look at the raw price itself, try and figure out what’s happening. You can try and just fit some kind of curve to it. If you just look at this graph, you’ll see that the curve that fits it the best is going to be some kind of logarithmic curve. The price itself is in a log graph, so it’s like a log chart or a log graph. And what this seems to be is essentially a fair value band.

So if you go to the next slide you can see I’ve just basically selected groups of data that are non-speculative in nature. Basically there wasn’t too much happening during that time, although obviously that is basically an arbitrary choice by me though, so you’ll get different results if you pick different things. And what that is aiming to do is provide some sort of idea of the like the base market value of Monero, like a fair value band that you could be justified in, you’re not but buying into the fomo or the speculative fever.

So if we go to the next one, I just put some numbers on there just for context. So that’s up to 2025. If this log regression were to hold, you know, you’d be expecting somewhere in the region of four hundred to thousand dollars, which is a big range, but that’s what you get, you know. You’re not gonna find any statistical model that’s gonna tell you the exact price, the four significant figures. But I guess, you know, we do have to be careful with these kind of models.

So if you go to the next slide this is a map, this is a graph of the German gold Mark versus the paper Mark, so versus the fiat currency that they implemented. And you can’t see the bottom there, but if we were in maybe like 1921 or something, and just thought near the bottom of that graph, we might plot a log regression against that, like I just did there. And I think we were good. Obviously things didn’t work out quite that way. We ended up with hyperinflation obviously. So yeah that is one flaw of the log regression model is that it doesn’t take into account inflation, which can lead to events like this one. So next slide, please.

Another take on the sort of log regression view of things is, so you take the y-axis is, you take the log of it, so you end up with like a log price graph. But an interesting twist is to on the x-axis you take the number of days since the genesis block or however far away you can find price data for. And you take the log of that, so basically the years get closer, and closer, and closer together as you go further and further on. And we end up with basically a linear fit here. Now you could argue it’s a bit tenuous, but we have a sort of a straight line up into the right here indicating that there’s some positive linear correlation on like when you scale the graph like this. Again we don’t have as much data with Monero as we had for Bitcoin. With Bitcoin this graph works very nicely. There’s a Medium article by Harold Christopher Burger, it’s called like the “Bitcoin power-law corridor of growth”, if you’re interested in figuring out how this graph works. But if you go to the next one.

You can basically shift that line upwards and downwards to get some sort of support and resistance regions basically, just trying to establish a playground in which Monero plays, you know. Again you’re not going to be able to figure out the, you know, the exact price that now is going to be on next Tuesday. But all we aim to do is to figure out are we in a speculative mania and therefore I should be careful, or actually is the market a bit cooler and therefore I feel more comfortable about adding. And pretty much everything I’ve shown you so far has shown that we’re close to fair value basically at the minute. So go to the next slide.

You can take the distance between that the linear regression, so between that straight fit line and plot that out. So basically if we have a positive value, where above that fair value line, that was followed by a linear regression. Alternatively if we’re below that, we have a negative value then, we’re below the line, and this is log distance. So the value of 1.5 there is quite some way it’s like an order of magnitude, like a 10x greater than the actual line value. And this is nice if you like oscillators, you basically want to, you know, figure out where we are, whether we’re overpriced or underpriced.

And so I think that’s basically all I’ve got. I think the next one, the next slide should be just questions. Yeah. So that was fairly speedy, but we are running behind. So any questions anyone? Is there a better way to do this using mic? Do you want to just shout?

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Chad:**_ Not really. To be honest, that’s probably something interesting to do, if you want to, you know…

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Chad:**_ Oh yeah, yeah. I guess, yeah, if you compare against Bitcoin you’re getting a more like pure measure, because the dollar supply is being messed around all the time. So yeah, you could pretty much just it wouldn’t be difficult to plug in the Bitcoin value to some of those models and see what happens. The code will be on my GitHub. If you find me afterwards I can send you it. Anything else? Yeah, yep.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Chad:**_ So everything I’ve shown you so far I think it basically suggests that we’re at sort of like, we’re at a fair value stage. I don’t think there’s much downside as in I think the downside is like limited at like 50 percent. I don’t think we’re gonna see another well an 80 percent correction from here, at least according to what I’ve seen so far. Are we in a bull market? I would say, I mean if we were in any other asset class, we would say we’re in a bull market, we’ve done pretty well over the last couple years. All-time highs end of this year? I don’t know. I just sort of think, you know, where are we going to be in 10 years. That’s I think trying… if you give both a price target and a time you’re almost guaranteed to be wrong. So you get one or the other, okay. Anyone else? All right. Well thank you.
